## Rationale and Specific Aims {.page_break_before}

Direct participation of the Black community is essential to any successful attempt at reparations. Members of our anchor institutions have long understood this, but we still struggle to meaningfully integrate community voice. In 1970, IUPUI published a private memo in response to growing organized resistance in the community as the Department of Highways started mass displacement of families in preparation for construction of I-69:

> “In fact, as social and commercial services disappear from the neighborhood, tenants and homeowners are asking if the City and the University are not making the area so barren that people are forced to move out rather than ‘die on the vine.’ Institutions are behaving in ways which look like the same old obstacles which poor Black folk have experienced over past years. There is some local bitterness about the ‘paternalistic’ approach common to organizations purporting to serve the neighborhood. The white or ‘giving’ group usually selects the local leadership it will work with, and secondly the group selects the service it thinks the neighborhood needs. People are no longer willing to appear grateful for things they never asked for” [@http://zotero.org/groups/2323485/items/8C92G7E2].

Fast forward now to 2020. Buckingham Companies has just withdrawn its proposal to develop a new apartment complex on the Ave after months of sustained opposition from a coalition calling itself Reclaim Indiana Avenue. The coalition states it is not intrinsically against development, but that there are several features it found unacceptable in Buckingham’s proposal. When asked why it had not sought more input from local residents, Buckingham stated that it had participated in extensive conversations with representatives from IUPUI and board members of the Madam Walker Legacy Center. But as eloquently explained 40 years ago, the Black community is tired of external organizations telling it what it needs. How can we do better?

The community land trust (CLT) model is a powerful tool for increasing affordable housing options, building wealth, and channeling community voice. The core mission of a CLT non-profit is to buy land and to steward its use for the benefit of the surrounding community, in perpetuity.  

A CLT enables affordable housing by separating ownership of land from ownership of a house on that land. The CLT keeps ownership of the land while a family buys the house, which is cheaper when sold by itself. Often the CLT will use a public subsidy to further discount the price.

Over time, the family pays off its mortgage and builds equity. When they are ready to resell, they get to keep most of the equity, but there is a stipulation that some will be shared back with the CLT. In this way, the family walks away increased aggregate wealth and the CLT ensures it is recycling dollars back into maintaining affordability.

A CLT channels community voice with its unique tripartite leadership structure. One-third of seats on a CLT board are filled by homeowners on CLT land. A second third is filled by residents who live in the surrounding neighborhood. The last third consists of local housing stakeholders and experts. Thus, a CLT ensures that a majority of its leadership is made up of people who are directly impacted by the CLT’s actions. Furthermore, the competing interests of each third of the board should balance out those of the others. Together they make choices that best fit the interests of the whole community.

If IUPUI and IU Health are to pay reparations and help form a CLT for the benefit of the Black community in Indianapolis, we as members of these anchor institutions need to use the Black community’s voice to clarify our mandate from Day 1. We will conduct semi-structured interviews to bolster that voice. It is our hope that the Black community will join us as partners as we undergo this process.
