## Study Procedures {.page_break_before}

Interviews will be performed by whatever method feels most safe and convenient to each participant (e.g. in person, over the phone, or Zoom). After the interview is complete, interviewers will ask the participant if we have permission to share the conversation publicly or if they would prefer for it to be kept solely for private use by the study. Examples for public use of the interviews include blog posts, podcasts, or digital archival.

Please see attached the outline of our semi-structured interview. We anticipate the interview will take ~30-40 minutes to complete. Interviews will be conducted by the study investigators.

We will generate interview transcripts with encrypted, cloud-based recording software and a smartphone. Transcripts will be qualitatively coded around the following hypothesized themes:

- General neighborhood perceptions
- Neighborhood housing issues
- Neighborhood visions for change
- Desired partnership organizations
- Perceived components of a just partnership
- Perceptions of IUSM/IU Health as partners
- Suggested additional connections that will build up a social network of stakeholders as well as identify future prospective interviewees

If other themes arise, they will be added to the codebook. Coding will be performed by at least 2 people to ensure concordance.

Concepts, people, neighborhoods, and organizations will be stored in a graph database that can be queried to compare and contrast patterns related to the themes above. Salient findings will be fed into subsequent investigations using quantitative methods.

